Shame.
How do we end up? It's fine though.
I'm still here ahead of schedule. Negotiate.
Oh, so also, yeah, so Todd, you need to talk
to Palm G about it then.
Are we? I none of these names tag
and my people why the Clarks have to wrestle to the death.
Aye,
Good morning. Um,
I don't know if this is being live streamed,
so I just wanna be careful till that members know that
That's okay. Recording
paused. Says paused.
Okay. I just see a thing saying this meeting is being live
streamed, so I just wanted to make sure you
Paused in our end.
Alright, good. But members of the public,
we are just waiting quietly.
Thanks, ed.
Just in case we
frictions are already outside ready to go.
I think they've flown somebody up for this too.
Oh yeah, no, they're out there.
You realize we're going all the way
above the down public.
Gary, what about the minutes?
I'm gonna do the minutes. Let's do the
I have those set, uh, to go
after the public session. Mr. Chair?
Yeah. It was just so I didn't have to bounce back
and forth between a public and a private
for one second and then miss it.
He's looking tired today, I think. Who is? Yeah.
Yeah, the other day. Yeah,
the lighting was better the other day I done it.
Oh, horrified.
That for sure was unshaven
and not looking at it's not very good light in this room.
I have you decided to show I, I've only just noticed.
Have you? Yeah. You look 10 years younger.
I noticed it is a better look.
That's hard to go from 20 to 10. God, Mr.
Look at you too. Cutting it fine. You're lucky.
30 seconds is spare. Oh my god. Don't think so.
30 me, my wife says passed hard when I can wake up day.
Let's, um, do we
get an official, let's get the official done.
Let's get started. Eh, so we're
in public session, guys.
Yes. Was this public? Yes.
This first bit and then we'll go
back into private for the rest.
Best behavior.
Good morning. Good morning. Nice to have you here.
Thank you.
Right. We've got, um, we are live now. Okay, cool.
We're in public sessions, so just so you know.
Um, would you like to introduce your team?
We've got about 20 minutes or so.
Uh, if it's okay, chair, I have,
uh, a few opening remarks.
Yeah. If that's okay. And I'll
introduce the team during those.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Uh, good morning everyone.
Uh, chair and committee members.
Uh, thank you for having us here today.
Uh, I I'm gonna limit my opening remarks
to just a few key themes
and issues that are top of mind on the back
of the Ombudsman's op cap report on the
Prisoners Extreme Risk Unit.
Uh, in the report, as you're aware,
there were three recommendations, uh, to cease the use
of the proof operating model, which we declined increased
time outta cell and increased access
to meaningful human contact, which we accepted
and ensuring safe and humane, transparent
and fair management of people in custody,
which we accepted subject to further work
to implement our plan to increase time outta cell,
increase meaningful human contact for the men in the Peru.
And to address wider comments in the report,
we established the Prisoners Extreme Risk Program
or our per program.
The program aims to ensure strategic
and operational alignment of all work contributing
to the future management of the people of extreme risk.
The response to the op cap report is a dedicated
work stream within this program.
The program also includes a dedicated
through operating model work stream,
which will review the current unit operating model
and explore opportunities for continuous improvement.
The prisons of at risk directorate
and the prisons of extreme risk units were set up in 2019
to manage people who present an extreme risk to the safety
of the public, our staff, and other people in prison.
The Pru has played a key role in promoting the safety
and mitigating the significant risk
posed by these individuals.
The Peru is currently the most suitable unit
to manage this risk.
No serious staff or prisoner
injuries have occurred in the Peru.
Since its establishment support, these men are provided
and the dedication shown by staff keeps everybody safe.
One of the complexities of the Peru is that it holds men
with a broad range of risk areas,
and we acknowledge there are some men in the Peru who
because of the type of risk they pose, beyond the immediacy
of violent extremism
or interpersonal violence may be better managed
in a different type of unit.
These men have significant influence capability in terms
of transnational organized crime or 10 o They are
therefore not currently suitable
to be managed in a mainstream or directed segregation unit.
As the committee is aware, the scope, scale
and impact of transnational organized
crime is growing in New Zealand.
And this has had a significant impact on Ural environment.
We've seen changes in prison dynamic dynamics resulting from
this and the harm that can cause both inside
and outside our prisons to the wide
and to the wider New Zealand communities to help respond
to the increasing enduring 10 o risks within
the Ural environment.
And to help contribute to the whole of government response
to tackling organized crime corrections has committed
to establish a dedicated unit to accommodate
and manage the highest risk 10 o
individuals in our management.
This specialized unit will be based at Auckland Prison,
and it will have a physical environment that will range, uh,
that will reflect a range of security classifications
with dedicated and consistently highly trained staff
to minimize opportunity for further offending and harm.
The Peru model in operation today is not the same as the one
that was in place when the unit was established
or at the time of the Ombudsman's inspection in 2023.
The operating model of the Peru is regularly evolving in
response to risk posed by those individuals
who present an extreme threat
or keep people in prison staff and the wider community.
Safe safety is our number one priority.
The prisons can be volatile environments.
We are constantly working to ensure the entire prison
network provides the safest environment possible
for our staff prisoners and our wider communities.
With me today, I have Juanita Ryan,
our Deputy Chief Executive
of Piora Health and Rehabilitation.
I have Jeanette Burns, director of Extreme Risk Directorate,
and Emma Garner, our Chief Mental
Health and Addictions Officer.
More than happy to take your questions. Thank you.
Yeah, you go. Um, there was, uh, so it's honorable. Dr.
Dr, can we just notice procedural?
Can we have a copy of those notes?
That would be really useful. Great.
Um, on page four of the ombudsman report, it kind of
in bullet points, you here them, here are the main things,
um, that are my concerns.
Um, and your, uh mm-hmm.
Introduction essentially said, we are doing really well,
but it didn't really address any
of those things kind of front on.
So I mean, even the front one, first one,
impressive living conditions unsuitable
for long-term management of people,
insufficient natural light and fresh air
and minimal time outside of cells and or,
or just in small individual yards. Has it changed?
Yes. Yes. Significantly So What, what terms
of the living conditions of just basic living conditions
mount of each time mount is,
is their natural light in the cells?
Can you just tell us what's changed?
So, so as part of the wider per program,
we have work streams dedicated to both the operating model
and the physical environment.
Um, this work is ongoing so
Far because you, this is a public session.
Can you just say, every cell now has natural light.
All the cells already had natural light
through the rear doors to the cell and through
I've been in some of those cells, I just No, because
Frustrat No, no.
Dun, let me, let's just get to the answers.
I just want to do it in a way
that we actually deal with each of these issues.
Okay. So let, let's just ask the question
a little bit more in a discipline manner.
Okay. I'll ask the Question. You've asked about
Our natural, how big is the,
how big is the window in the door
that lets natural light into these cells?
I do not have the size here today,
but we can provide any details on the cell layout that
that is easily available.
What I can say is the yard adjacent to the cell has no, uh,
uh, has no covered or sealed covered area.
So there is natural light coming through there,
and that is a large 10 square meter area
with natural light coming into the cell through the door,
through the change to the operating model.
We've seen the men have more out of cell type
and association and the unit yards.
Sorry, when you said that
before, I, I think what member's asking,
and I heard you say that how much more time,
Sorry, I might, I might defer to my, uh, colleague here.
We've changed the operator model depending on
the mixing of the individuals.
Yes. Depending on the, the risk that each
of the individuals propose, they each have, um,
allocated time out.
So in the yard that's adjacent to the cell, most
of the men are having six hours time out in that yard. Um,
The 10 square meter yard,
The yard that is attached Yes. To the cell
Is the 10 square meters.
I'm not sure of the It is
approximately 10 square meters. The
Commissioner said 10 square.
So you're saying they have six hours?
A minimum of six hours. Okay, cool. In there.
And they're also coming out of their cells to have a range
of activities.
Um, they have, um, art, art tutor.
Sorry, I can I refer to my notes though?
I'm giving you absolutely accurate, uh, information. Yeah.
Um, we have, uh, men engaging in case management education,
library services, uh, forensic mental health intervention
and support practice team,
which our health colleagues
can talk a little bit more about.
They're seen by a range of, um, health professionals.
They have cultural support and programs.
Uh, they have a spiritual team that they're able
to access in prison.
Chaplain, uh, I've talked about the arts tutor.
Um, they have legal and family visits, phone calls,
and they each have an individual exercise fitness program,
which brings them out of their cells. Right. For various.
And that's part of the six hours you're talking about?
Sorry, in addition to part six hours?
No, in addition to the six hours they have.
So glad we clarified that. I'm happy to, sorry.
I'll go to, um, Ms. Walters here.
Uh, I've got a number of questions. Right.
Thank you. Um, it's,
it's obviously quite a jaw dropping report to read.
And I take the point that the visit was in 2023
and there have been a number of changes.
The most significant proposal was, um, the removal
of the operating model itself.
It felt to me like there was a request that that needed
to be thought through from scratch
because of the lack of accountability.
Um, and it says that there was significant
and inappropriate autonomy.
Decision making was opaque. Um, small group of people.
Record keeping was poor, lack of oversight,
internal assurance over operations wasn't
by senior leadership, wasn't there.
So my question is about accountability
and how the model has shifted
and the rationale for not doing a complete overhaul
and from a first principles basis building.
Okay, let's hear from, yep.
Okay. So, so to be clear, we, uh, the recommendation
to cease using the model, we decline.
We did not feel that that was a safe
thing to do for New Zealand.
Um, in regards to the program, as I'd stated,
we are doing a review of the Peru operating model
and physical environment from the ground up.
We are doing exactly what you are saying, uh, in terms of,
uh, um, changes that since, since the report has landed,
we are now seeing or
or have introduced a broader multidisciplinary team
that considers, uh,
the receptional placement within the unit
that considers the management
of the men in the unit periodically,
there is an escalation process
where we have a secondary consideration through myself
to review those placements, uh, that
that process is being finalized as we speak.
Uh, and we have a range of changes to the operating model
that respond to that, uh, those comments that you made.
So again, I just want, I just invite you
to be a little bit more specific about chances
because Travis, I hope people will wanna come back.
So, um, when the review you're doing, um,
and there's a lot of reviews
and all this sort stuff, when, when is
that due to be completed?
Uh, we hope to have, uh, an operating model, uh,
or a finalized operating model, uh, in uh,
the first quarter of 2026.
Right. Okay. So that's March next year. Right.
I'm gonna go over to him, to Mr. Stevenson. Look,
Thanks for being here this morning.
Uh, just was interested in picking up on some
of the things you said in your opening comments
just so we can get a better idea.
There's, you, you mentioned there's a broad range
of risk profiles with the prisoners
that are being dealt with in this unit.
So I wanna, can you just give some more specifics on that?
And then the kind of follow up is,
and then you've mentioned obviously trans people involved in
transnational organized crime is one type of risk profile
and you're now looking at a separate unit.
Have you identified other types of prisoners
with risk profiles
that may also require a different type of unit?
What's your thinking there? Because, yeah,
So, so the unit does cater for, as, as I mentioned,
the violent extremism of those that, uh, uh, have committed
or capable of ext extreme interpersonal violence.
We've seen a change to the risk profile
with individuals entering the country,
many extradited from other countries that are indicate, uh,
that are involved in syndicated organized crime.
Um, we have observed that when they come into our system,
um, uh, our system really isn't built with its processes
and risk assessments to manage the highest
risk of those individuals.
And we have experienced, and, and
and you would've seen in the media, uh, events
where offenses have been committed while,
uh, in the prison system.
Um, what we have then done is brought, uh, uh,
those individuals into this environment with a high level
of oversight to manage that risk.
We take the comments that the ombudsman made,
that we have pushed the boundaries within the, the scope
of individuals within this environment.
And we're looking at creating an envir, another environment
that, um, um, doesn't reflect the maximum security fabric.
Looks at a broad range of, uh,
security classification responses,
but provides the oversight
and monitoring for these very high risk, uh, influential,
uh, international individuals.
Just a quick supplementary,
and then what about, um, people
with significant mental health issues?
Are they, are you thinking about how they're, um,
appropriately obviously following the report also what kind
of interventions you can put in place for them,
how they're appropriately managed, et cetera? Uh,
Yeah. For the wider prison population
or within our environment,
but I, I will defer
to my health colleagues for the responses.
Yeah. Yeah.
So, um, with the, the 15 individuals
that are currently in the unit, 11 of them have, um,
mental health support or have had mental health support.
Four remaining individuals.
It is available for them, but that's not, um, thought
to be necessary and they haven't sorted at this time.
Uh, so there's the intervention
and support practice team, which was talked about.
And also forensic mental health services run
by Health New Zealand are available to all of the people
that are within that service.
So I'm relatively comfortable that all of the individuals
who need mental health support are getting it.
Okay. Thank you. Got Nan.
Thank you. Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I understand, thank you for coming.
Uh, I understand you mentioned a lot of the things that are
provided six hours, you know, minimum, uh, arts,
mental health, is that being provided consistently?
And also in terms of frequency,
like are we looking at six hours per day
and you can hand on heart
and have records that every single person have been
consistently provided with six hours?
Every single person has been consistently provided with.
Okay. Additional things being my
first question. I do have another question,
Uh, before I defer to my colleague, uh, uh, Jeanette here.
Uh, one of the, the criticisms in the report was
around consistent record keeping
and that's something that we have significantly improved.
And so we are able to evidence and demonstrate what has been
provided to each individual on a daily basis in regards to
what is actually provided is dependent on
how they present their behavior and how we can mix them.
That you would understand in this environment.
Not everyone can mix with each other.
They pose very different risks.
There, there are some individuals that we can't put
with other people because there would be an interpersonal
risk or something along those lines.
Um, so we have to manage the,
the outta cell time in addition to the,
the adjacent yard time.
So whilst we've talked about the outta cell opportunities,
the adjacent yard time, there are also two, uh, uh,
internal yards and day rooms which have had significant
improvements that they, they access
during the day in addition to that,
or that may be in, in place of the yard may be accessible,
but they may leave their cell and go into a day room
and have a social time if it's appropriate to mix.
Um, but I'll, I'll, I'll
defer to Jeanette to talk around that.
I've got too much more to say
'cause I think you've covered it, Lee.
But in terms of, uh, their adjacent cell time
that is consistently offered hand on heart every day,
the minimum is out, whether they use it
or not is obviously up to the individual men.
Everything outside of the cell, that's the,
those are the activities that I talked about
that we are trying to increase and find more spaces for.
And we're also, some of the men are associating
with each other now, which they weren't
when the ombudsman visited.
So we've done some very careful risk assessments.
And so two men may be in one of the large yards having,
you know, their own meaningful time with their child.
Okay. That's good. We've got the answer.
Yeah. Just another question.
Um, you mentioned, um, phone response to,
um, uh, Ms.
ESS regarding accountability.
And you mentioned in terms of the process
around that accountability.
Can I check that ultimately goes to you,
but you're also part of the system.
Is there a independent, other than the ombudsman of course,
is there anyone else independently from you
that also be able to review complaints?
Uh, complaints or placements?
So I talked about placement decisions,
not complaints. Okay. So
Well co We have the prison Inspectorate.
Yeah. Uh, and we have the office, the ombudsman.
There are a whole range of other external bodies that, uh,
an individual could raise concerns with, such
as the Human Rights commission
or, or, or the, or other bodies.
And in regards to placements and independence
and decision making, which was the,
the criticism in the report.
Mm-hmm. We now have a, a multidisciplinary team
that looks at, uh, um, the, the,
the recommendation for placement.
So whilst the ultimate decision maker is our director of,
of the, uh, uh, directorate, um, there are a range
of inputs into that.
And the escalation point is myself as commissioner,
uh, should that be challenged.
And would you like to talk about the,
the panels and membership?
Uh, yes. Uh, they vary. They have a core membership.
Uh, and that will be, um, some of the members
of the actual directorate who have expertise
We we're talking about. When
you say they we're talking about the group
that oversees the multidisciplinary team
that you refer to, is that what we're talking about?
Uh, the multidisciplinary team report through
to different areas of the department.
So it's not all just the directorate team.
There are some members of the directorate team on there
who have their own specialist knowledge
and some of the, you know, terrorism,
But they're the first one.
They're the first ones to make decision.
I just wanna get absolute clarity for the question is
of way you described it is it seems like you have a
multidisciplinary team that looks at placement.
And then if there's, then what happens then if there's a,
you make the final decision as the, um, person in charge
of facility and if there is a complaint,
is it, does it go to usual
It's challenge to that challenge if there,
if there's a review requested by the man himself right. And
Then goes, Goes to you that then the review
Goes to you and who's on the multidisciplinary team
that you referred to three times
The panel. So
this is the panel that that, um,
looks at whether the placement is
And who's on the panel.
Okay. So on that panel is members
of the directorate team Yeah.
Who have their specialist knowledge in their own areas.
There's someone from, um, the health team, um, who
or is then able to draw on other areas, um,
of the department, whether it be mental health
or whether it be psychology.
There's a representation from, um, Juanita's team.
Uh, we have police, um, at, uh, on that panel for some
of the men, uh, particularly
for the transnational organized crime.
Um, who else do we have on that panel?
We have, um, other experts from time
to time that we bring in.
Okay. Um, our academics. Does
That answer your question? Yeah,
I, I wanna go to Mr. Ferris now. Can I start?
No, no, I've got, I've got two.
We're bringing outta time and I've gonna come back to
Mr. Fer. Hey, go
guys. Um,
how many Maori are in the unit?
Four Maori three. I beg your pardon? Three. Three.
Is it a three outta 15 consistent number? Yes. Yeah.
How much time did they spend in average
As in the length of time they resided in the unit?
Uh, I wouldn't have that to hand.
Obviously the unit started in 2019 with one individual, uh,
who obviously as we know is not Maori.
Um, that would be the longest period of time.
Uh, from there I would have
to look at when in each individual came
in and, and all that time.
We can provide that if that's
Helpful. Okay. So, uh, yeah.
Cool.
So you've made a lot of, um, adjustments since the report.
How long since the last report,
was there a report before this one?
No, no, no. Oh, all right.
Um, are there Maori in the, like the working team,
the guys team in there?
Yes. Yep. Yes, there are. Yeah.
Uh, does that, uh, uh, uh, does it have a leadership
body like its own thing
or was it just up to your guys central leadership
in this particular unit
Is in, in regards To unit? I mean it's pretty, it's
It's pretty Intensive work, right?
Yes. So just does it have it have its own
dedicated ops crew?
There isn't a dedicated Maori operational crew.
Is there a but there operational,
there cultural support within that environment
that would report through a different area, doesn't report
through the ins to, to the directorate,
and they're available to support decision making.
They may come into the, uh, multidisciplinary teams
and they work with the men in the unit.
So the unit has its own dedicated,
It has access to the broader
services across the organization. It's
You, would It just for your brief, brief,
I wanna come back to Ms. Anderson. Well,
Maybe just for an example,
we have a Copa Maori practitioner
who sits within the mental health service.
The mental health services line of, um, uh,
line management comes through to me
and not to the commissioner.
So it is independent.
So although it works in the custodial context,
it's independent of the director at itself.
Okay. Right. Um, thank you. Thank you.
Um, so I understand that there's sort
of 10 o risks associated with these people.
That's what elevates them.
Uh, have, have, must they have done some kind
of violent thing in the wider system in order
to get into the, uh, into this unit?
Or, or are there some in there
that have just got a high risk profile?
I, I, I think the, the linked to violence is very, uh,
linked to the creation of the unit and,
and the initial individual
and subsequent couple of individuals that came in.
Beyond that, um, what we've seen is the risk post, uh,
through commissioning of crime influence to cause violence.
So, uh, um, to be able to commission violence through others
and the ability to observe that or, or,
or have, have, uh, um, have that, uh, picked up
through our channels can lead to that influence risk.
And it's that high influence risk that we're trying to
mitigate to, to disable the ability to do that. Who
Makes the determination for them to go into the,
So that would be the panel.
The panel right at the panel within
that unit of the, the Peru order,
The panel we described before, which have a range
of inputs including some of our, uh,
justice sector partners such as police.
There will be other individuals depending on the individual
that's been recommended, we will seek, uh, particular, uh,
uh, guidance or support in that decision making.
And, um, the sort of isolation element.
I, I've heard some comments that, that
that's no longer the case.
That there's some instances where there's two inmates within
that 10 meter square courtyard. How, how often?
No, that is not, they don't go into each other's cells. Oh
No. They, in the court yard,
They will come together in the yard
and it's far bigger than 10 meters.
Okay. Right. That's a big gap. So I
Don't want to confuse the two things.
Okay. What we refer
to the on sale yard, they have their cell.
Yeah. And then there is an exercise yard attached to it
with a, with a door that opens between them
and they have access to that adjacent to the cell.
Yeah. That was one of the criticisms of, uh, uh,
of the report, the improvement there is not only the greater
access there or the avail ability to have that
during the day, but the ability to leave the cell area than
go into other areas of the unit, such as the communal yards
or the communal day room. Mm-hmm.
So how often are they having
interaction with another inmate?
Uh, it depends on the individual and the risk they pose,
but it happens on a daily basis for those that can mix.
Uh, and, and those mixes change.
In fact, we had upon incident, we had a, an event, uh,
in recent time where we had to readjust that alignment.
Yeah. So that, that is very, um, uh,
responsive to what happens in the unit.
And just finally, are, are there any of those 15
that do not have interaction with others because of Yes.
How many?
Uh, two I want to say,
uh, at the, at the moment.
Uh, and, um, that's because of the very high risk that
They pose, but that can, that can change.
And, and do you have like a plan
or a program to sort of try
to reintroduce them to others that
There, there is, there's, i,
I don't wanna conflate associated with other prisoners
and association with other people.
Yeah. Uh, we supplement,
if we can't associate two prisoners,
we have one individual obviously
who would pose quite a high risk
to others and others to him.
Um, and so we don't obviously mix that individual,
but we do supplement that with a provision of,
of other meaning con, meaningful contact
through activities officers, um, counselors, uh, other,
other cultural or religious support,
whether or not that's accepted.
Um, there, there is an individual in there
that doesn't engage or uh, uh, doesn't uh,
really accept a lot of that support.
Um, but those that are not associating, we build on that
to the point where we can get them to associate. Thank
You. Alright. Hey now
thank you. Um, uh, that was very helpful.
So thank you for your time this morning.
Um, we will continue on with other stuff,
but thank you for Kevin.
Thanks. Thank you.